# **Java Lesson 5.1**

## 🏗️ Classes and objects

Java is known as an object-oriented programming language. **Object-oriented programming** (OOP) is a very important concept in programming languages like Java. Today, we are going to learn about **classes** and **objects**, the very fundamentals of OOP.

So what is a class, conceptually? You can think about classes as **blueprints** or **templates** for robots. A class defines the **properties** and **behaviors** of that robot once it is actually constructed, but a class definition does not do the construction itself.

**Objects** are the completed robots created from the blueprints (classes).

Object-oriented programming is often used to model real-world things. For instance, we can write a class called `Computer` that's a blueprint for computers. It will include behaviors like `powerOn`, `powerOff`, etc, as well as properties like `age`, `operatingSystem`, `password` etc. The class is a blueprint. It's only when we construct objects from that blueprint do we have actual instances of computers with the behaviors and properties specified in the class definition.

## 💡 Classes

Now let's take a look at OOP in Java code. You're actually already very familiar to writing the most basic class definition. In fact, you have been using classes since the very first program you wrote in Java.

You're probably very familiar with the following lines of code:

```java
class Main {
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        System.out.println("Hello, world!");
    }
}
```

In this program, we have a `class` called `Main` with a method called `main()`.

In addition to the `Main` class, we can write another class called `Computer` which is a blueprint for a computer.

```java
class Computer {

}
```

Right now our class is empty. Let's add two methods in the `Computer` class: `powerOn` and `powerOff`.

```java
class Computer {
    public void powerOn() {
        System.out.println("Powering on...");
    }

    public void powerOff() {
        System.out.println("Powering off...");
    }
}
```

## 🏛 Objects

In the `main` method of the `Main` class, we're going to construct an instance of the `Computer` class.

```java
class Main {
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        Computer myComputer = new Computer();
    }
}
```

Let's look at the syntax of constructing a class instance.

```java
Computer myComputer = new Computer();
```

Hopefully, this will appear familiar if you have used `ArrayList`s and `HashMap`s before. These are classes, after all!

So now we have created `myComputer`, an object. This is an actual construction made from the blueprint of the `Computer` class. That means, it can carry out the actions defined in the class. In other words, we can call the `powerOn()` and `powerOff()` methods.

```java
class Main {
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        Computer myComputer = new Computer();
        myComputer.powerOn();
        myComputer.powerOff();
    }
}
```

### ✍ Exercise: class builder

Now it's your turn. Define a class and make an instance of it. If you want a small challenge, add a method or two to your class and call them!

```java
class Car {
    public void startEngine() {
        System.out.println("Car's engine started.");
    }

    public double getFuelPercentage() {
        return Math.random();
    }
}

class Main {
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        Car myCar = new Car();
        myCar.startEngine();
        System.out.println(myCar.getFuelPercentage());
    }
}
```

## 💻 Summary

Object-oriented programming is one of the most complex ideas in programming to someone just starting to learn Java, and can be quite intimidating at first. And while at first glance classes and objects might seem utterly useless (since in simpler programs classes aren't *absolutely required*), OOP is used literally all the time in larger programs.

Don't worry if you feel a bit confused about what we talked about today. In the rest of this chapter, we'll continue to explore object-oriented programming.
