# **Java Lesson 5.2**

## 🤖 Class attributes and methods

Today we will continue learning about object-oriented programming in Java, focusing in particular on class methods and attributes.

Before we get to that though, let's quickly review what we learned about last lesson: **classes** and **objects**. It is helpful to think about classes as blueprints for robots and objects as the robots created from the blueprints.

What's in a class definition? Well, we want to specify the properties and behaviors of the robot.

### 📏 Class attributes

The properties of an object are defined by the class's attributes. These are usually information about an object. Using our robot analogy, it can be a robot's name, ID, and age. Attributes are really just variables in a class.

The code implementation of class attributes is shown below.

```java
class Robot {
    int age = 0;
}

class Main {
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        Robot robot1 = new Robot();
        Robot robot2 = new Robot();

        robot2.age++;
        System.out.println(robot1.age);
        System.out.println(robot2.age);
    }
}
```

Notice how we can access object members using "dot-notation" (`object`.`attribute`).

## 🛠 Class methods

The **instance methods** of a class defines the behaviors of the class's objects. You've been using object methods in many of your programs, such as the methods of `ArrayList`s, `HashMap`s, `Scanner`s, etc. All of these methods perform some sort of operation that's part of the class's functionality.

Below, a method has been added to the `Robot` class and called in the `Main` class.

```java
class Robot {
    int age = 0;

    public void sayHi() {
        System.out.println("Greetings, human.");
    }
}

class Main {
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        Robot robot = new Robot();
        robot.sayHi();
    }
}
```

Notice that the `sayHi()` method has only one modifier, `public`. In a future lesson of this chapter, we'll talk about why `static` disappears in the headings of instance methods.

Besides the lack of `static` in the method heading and how they are called, instance methods are essentially the same thing as the methods we've written previously. They can take parameters, return values, etc.

### ✍ Exercise: secret blueprint of the robots

Let's continue expanding the `Robot` class by adding more class attributes and instance methods.

```java
class Robot {
    int age = 0;
    double batteryPercentage = 100;
    boolean powerOn = false;

    public void sayHi() {
        System.out.println("Greetings, human.");
    }

    public void powerOn() {
        powerOn = true;
        System.out.println("Powered on");
    }

    public void powerOff() {
        powerOn = false;
        System.out.println("Powered off");
    }

    public void displayStatus() {
        System.out.println("Battery level: " + batteryPercentage + "%");
        if (powerOn) {
            System.out.println("Power on");
        } else {
            System.out.println("Power off");
        }
    }
}
```

## 💻 Summary

Class attributes store properties. Class methods define behaviors. These are incredibly important parts of any class you'll write. It's not a bad idea to write a few more classes to practice working with class attributes and instance methods.
