# **Java Lesson 5.7**

## 🚗 Polymorphism

In the previous lesson of chapter 5: object-oriented programming, we talked about the concept of inheritance, which is how a class can **extend** another class, allowing it to **inherit** attributes and methods of the parent class.

Today, we're going to explore the topic of **polymorphism**. The word polymorphism means to *occur in several different forms*. Essentially, polymorphism allows us to implement different method definitions in different subclasses.

As an example, we can have a parent class `Person` that is extended by the subclasses `Student` and `Teacher`. If we define a `sayHi()` method for the `Person` class, it can be overridden in the child classes. This way, one method can have different implementations in different subclasses. The same method occurs in different forms.

### Polymorphism in Java

Putting the description above into Java code, we'll get something like this.

```java
class Person {
    private String name;
    private int age;

    public Person(String name, int age) {
        this.name = name;
        this.age = age;
    }

    public void sayHi() {
        System.out.println("\nHi, my name is " + this.name + " and I am " + this.age);
    }
}

class Student extends Person {
    private int grade;

    public Student(String name, int age, int grade) {
        super(name, age);
        this.grade = grade;
    }

    public void sayHi() {
        super.sayHi();
        System.out.println("I am a student in grade " + this.grade);
    }
}

class Teacher extends Person {
    private String subject;

    public Teacher(String name, int age, String subject) {
        super(name, age);
        this.subject = subject;
    }

    public void sayHi() {
        super.sayHi();
        System.out.println("I teach " + this.subject);
    }
}

class Main {
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        Person p = new Person("Alex", 26);
        p.sayHi();

        Student s = new Student("Steve", 16, 10);
        s.sayHi();

        Teacher t = new Teacher("Joe", 48, "math");
        t.sayHi();
    }
}
```

Quite a few things going on here. Firstly, notice that the `Person`, `Student`, `Teacher` classes each have their own definitions of the `sayHi()` method. `Person` has one, but the subclasses define their own versions which override the one in `Person`. If we didn't define the overriding `sayHi()` methods in the `Student` and `Teacher` subclasses, the parent `sayHi()` method would be called when `s.sayHi()` or `t.sayHi()` are called. But because we did, the `sayHi()` methods of `Student` and `Teacher` classes are called for `s` and `t`.

Another benefit of polymorphism is for objects inheriting the same parent class to be grouped together in an array or `ArrayList`. Normally, a `Person`, a `Student`, and a `Teacher` can't be put in the same array, but polymorphism changes that. Notice in the code below that `p`, `s`, and `t` are all declared to be `Person`s in a process known as "upcasting". This lets objects of a subclass to be treated as instances of the superclass.

We can write this in our `main` method.

```java
public static void main(String[] args) {
    Person p, s, t;
    p = new Person("Alex", 26);
    s = new Student("Steve", 16, 10);
    t = new Teacher("Joe", 48, "math");

    Person[] people = {p, s, t};
    for (Person x : people) {
        x.sayHi();
    }
}
```

### ✍ Exercise: zoo

Use your new knowledge about polymorphism in Java to create an array/`ArrayList` of animals. Define a parent `Animal` class and some child classes. Remember to apply polymorphism in order to store the different subclass instances in the array/`ArrayList`.

## 💻 Summary

Polymorphism is definitely not the easiest thing to understand, but it can help programmers a lot when used correctly.
