# **Java Lesson 3.1**

## 🤖 Introduction to methods

Today's lesson starts our investigation of **methods**, a very central concept in many programming languages such as Java.

## 💡 What are methods?

So what is a method? A method is a **block of code which we call to run**. Methods allow us to define a procedure once, and use it many times.

## 📠 Methods in Java

The syntax of a method in Java can be somewhat confusing and intimidating at first. Let's first take a look at the big picture, and then break it down into smaller parts.

```java
MODIFIERS RETURN_TYPE METHOD_NAME(PARAMETER_LIST) {
    METHOD_BODY
    return RETURN_VALUE  // Optional
}
```

The important part of a method is its **method header**:

* `MODIFIERS`: Different modifiers give methods different **properties**. We will talk more about modifiers later in this course. For now, just write `public static` as the modifiers.
* `METHOD_NAME`: The **name** of the method. Same rules as variable names.
* `RETURN_TYPE`: We will discuss this in the next lesson. For now, we'll just write `void`.
* `PARAMETER_LIST`: We will discuss this in the next lesson. For now, we'll leave this blank.

### ✍ Exercise: identifying method components

Look at the (hopefully) somewhat familiar looking method below, name the components of this method.

```java
public static void main(String[] args) {
    System.out.println("What are the parts of this method?");
}
```

## 📝 Defining Java methods

Let's write our first Java method, which will simply print something out.

```java
public static void firstMethod() {
    System.out.println("This is our first method!");
}
```

Something to note is that we define methods outside the `main` method.

When we run this code, nothing happens! We only defined the method, giving a set of instructions to Java. But we never told Java to run the instructions. We need to **call** the method for it to run. Before we get to that though...

### ✍ Exercise: method writer

Write a Java method that does something (anything).

```java
public static void aMethod() {
    int a = 3;
    int b = 4;
    System.out.print(a + b);
}
```

## 📞 Calling Java methods

By defining a method, we have created a set of instructions for Java to carry out, calling it is telling Java to execute the instructions. When we want to call a method, we can just write:

```java
METHOD_NAME(PARAMETER_LIST);
```

So to call our method from before, we can just write:

```java
firstMethod();
```

This will run the code inside of `firstMethod()`.

## 💻 Summary

Methods is one of the central pillars of Java programming. It is good practice to separate individual components of a program into their own methods which we can call to run. This way, our programs will be easier to read and debug.

In the next few videos, we will take a closer look at the individual components of Java methods.
