# **Java Lesson 3.2**

## 📩 Method parameters and `return`ing data

In the last lesson of this course, you were introduced to the concept of **methods** in Java. Just to quickly review what we learned, methods are "blocks" of code that we can define. We call a method to run the code in it.

Last time, our methods simply **do** some things, like printing things out, performing some operations, etc. However, these actions do not take any inputs. In other words, each time we run a method, the exact same thing happens. In many scenarios, we want our methods to take **inputs** and perform operations depending on the input(s) given. These inputs are called **parameters** in programming.

In addition to accepting **inputs** from the method call, methods can also **output** data to the method call. This is called `return`ing.

## 🎯 Functions in math

Before we talk about input-accepting output-returning methods in Java, let's first make sure we understand mathematical functions conceptually, since the two concepts are very related.

Below are two math functions:

* `f(x)=x*x`
* `g(x)=3x+4`

Let's think about what these functions do.

* `f` will take the **input** `x`, square it, then **output** the result.
* `g` will take the **input** `x`, multiply it by 3 and add 4, then **output** the result.

We can pass different `x` values into these two functions and obtain different outputs depending the inputs.

* `f(2)=4`
* `f(-4)=16`

Functions have 3 main parts:

* Input(s)
* Operation(s)
* Output

## 📠 Methods in Java

Methods are similar to functions in that they **can** (but don't *need* to) have:

* **parameter(s)**: the input(s)
* **method body**: the operation(s) (can be anything)
* **`return` value**: the output

Let's take another look at the syntax of a Java method shown in the last lesson:

```java
MODIFIERS RETURN_TYPE METHOD_NAME(PARAMETER_LIST) {
    METHOD_BODY
    return RETURN_VALUE  // Optional
}
```

Today, we will focus on three parts of methods:

* `RETURN_TYPE`: Methods can `return` data to the place where they are called. When defining a method, we need to state the **data type of the `return` value**. This can be `String`, `int`, `boolean`, etc. If a method does not `return` a value, the `RETURN_TYPE` is `void`.
* `PARAMETER_LIST`: Comma-separated list of method **inputs**. Example: `String a, int x, double myDoubleParameter`
* `return RETURN_VALUE`: Methods can `return` data to where they are called.

Let's turn the mathematical function `f(x)=x*x` above into a Java method.

```java
public static double f(double x) {
    return x * x;
}
```

Notice how the...

* `RETURN_TYPE` has been changed to `double` because our method `return`s a `double`.
* `PARAMETER_LIST` contains one parameter, a `double` variable called `x`.
* `METHOD_BODY` squares the input `x`, and `return`s the result.

To call the method `f` with 2 as the input `x`, we can just write the following in the `main` method.

```java
System.out.println(f(2));
```

We can also store the value `return`ed from a method call in a variable so we can use the value later, perhaps even as input to another method call!

```java
double y = f(-4);
System.out.println(y);
System.out.println(f(y));
```

### ✍ Exercise: your method with parameter

Now it's your turn to convert the following math function into a Java method.

* `g(x)=3x+4`

```java
public static double g(double x) {
    return 3 * x + 4;
}
```

To call the method `g` in the `main` method, we can just write:

```java
System.out.println(g(3));
System.out.println(g(-10));
```

It is important to note that when calling a method, the list of **arguments** passed into the method call must match the parameters that the method was defined to accept. In other words, you can't pass `"Hello!"` where the method is expecting a `boolean`!

Methods can also take more than one parameters, and they don't have to be of the same data type. Below is an example.

```java
public static void greetFriend(String name, int age, boolean isProgrammer) {
    System.out.println("Hello! My name is " + name + ", and I am " + age + "-year-old.");
    if (isProgrammer) {
        System.out.println("I am a programmer!!!");
    } else {
        System.out.println("I am not a programmer 😭 but I am learning programming 😀!");
    }
}
```

To call this method, we can write this in the `main` method:

```java
greetFriend("Sophia", 15, true);
greetFriend("Aidan", 15, false);
```

Notice how this method takes parameters but doesn't `return` anything. Parameters and `return`ing are both optional for methods and having one doesn't mean we need the other.

## 💻 Summary

Today you learned all about method parameters and `return`ing from methods. These are key concepts that are very important in Java methods, and will be used in most if not all programs you write.
