# **Java Lesson 3.3**

## 📍 Scope

Today we will learn about scope in Java. While not a concept that only applies to methods, scope is a very important concept that can cause many bugs and errors when writing programs with methods.

## 🤔 What is scope?

Scope is about the extent in which something - in this case a variable - can be accessed. You probably already know that a variable can only be accessed after it's declared, but there are also other rules regarding the accessing of variables.

Let's take a look at the code below. It throws an error. Why?

```java
for (int i = 0; i < 2; i++) {
    System.out.print(i);
}
System.out.println(i);
```

The variable `i` was declared in the `for` loop header. So its **scope** is the `for` loop. This means that the variable `i` can only be accessed inside the `for` loop. If we want to access `i` outside the loop, we will have to declare it outside the `for`-loop scope.

```java
int i;
for (i = 0; i < 2; i++) {
    System.out.print(i);
}
System.out.println();
System.out.println(i);
```

## 🏙️ Blocks

To better understand why the examples above behave the way they do, let's talk about **blocks** in Java. A block is **the code between a pair of curly braces (`{}`)**.

When you write an `if`-`else if`-`else` statement, a loop, a method, etc, you're writing blocks of code.

```java
if (SOME_CONDITION) {
    // A block of code
} else if (SOME_OTHER_CONDITION) {
    // Another block of code
} else {
    // Yet another block of code
}

for (FOR_LOOP_HEADER) {
    // Block of code
}

public static void main(String[] args) {
    // A block of code
}
```

We can also have code blocks without the aforementioned code structures. They can just as well exist on their own.

```java
{
    boolean isScopeImportant = true;
    System.out.println(isScopeImportant);
}
```

## 🛫 Combining scopes and blocks

Variables declared inside a block can only be accessed in that block after the variable declaration. In the case of `for`-loops, we can consider the header to be part of the block for our purposes.

In the code below, because `x` is declared in the block of the `if` statement, we cannot access it outside of the block.

```java
if (true) {
    int x = 0;
    System.out.println(x);
}
System.out.println(x);
```

## 📫 Method scope

We'll wrap up our discussion today talking about scopes in methods. Variables declared in a method can be accessed in the method after the line of declaration. But, it cannot be accessed in another method.

```java
public class Main {
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        someMethod();
        System.out.println(x);
    }

    public static void someMethod() {
        int x = 0;
    }
}
```

The program above will throw an error, since `x` cannot be accessed outside of the method scope it is declared in. In order to access a value declared in a method scope in another method, we need to `return` that value to the method call.

```java
public class Main {
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        int x = someMethod();
        System.out.println(x);
    }

    public static int someMethod() {
        int x = 0;
        return x;
    }
}
```

Likewise, if we have a variable in the `main` method which we need in `someMethod`, we can pass that value as argument into the `someMethod` method call. That way, we will be able to access that value through the parameter of the method. Let's practice that in the exercise below.

### ✍ Exercise: fixing scope issues

Using the same 2 methods in the class above, declare a variable in the `main` method. Then use it in `someMethod` without passing it into the proper scope. You'll see an error. Fix the error at this point.

* Step 1:

```java
public class Main {
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        int x = 0;
        someMethod();
    }

    public static void someMethod() {
        System.out.println(x);
    }
}
```

* Step 2:

```java
public class Main {
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        int x = 0;
        someMethod(x);
    }

    public static void someMethod(int var) {
        System.out.println(var);
    }
}
```

## 💻 Summary

If you ever see an `error: cannot find symbol` but you swear you've defined that variable, scope might just be the issue.
