# **Java Lesson 3.4**

## 🤯 Method overloading

Today's topic is **method overloading**, which is a useful topic to know about when using methods in Java.

## ⏸ What is method overloading?

Method overloading is defining multiple versions of a method with the **same name**, but with **different parameters**. Different parameters means that the **number and/or data type(s) of the parameters is different**, NOT different parameter names.

Why would we want to do such a thing? Let's think about a method that does some mathematical operation, squaring the input for instance. Without method overloading, we will only be able to pass one type of number into the method call (i.e. either `int` or `double`, not both). With method overloading, we can overload the method with two sets of parameters.

```java
public static int squareNumber(int x) {
    return x * x;
}

public static double squareNumber(double x) {
    return x * x;
}
```

We can call the `squareNumber` method with both `int`s and `double`s now. Java will look for the method with a parameter list that matches the list of arguments in the method call and run the code in that method.

Notice how the return type of the `squareNumber` varies depending on the parameter list. That is allowed as long as the parameters are different. Since squaring an `int` would `return` an `int`, and squaring a `double` might `return` a `double`, we can match the method return type to reflect this.

Let's see what happens when we call the `squareNumber` method.

```java
System.out.println(squareNumber(-3));
System.out.println(squareNumber(2.5));
```

Even though we don't specify which overloaded version of the method to call, Java will look at the argument passed in, check it against the parameters of the overloaded method definitions, and run the method version whose parameter list matches the argument list. When an `int` is passed, the method whose parameter is `int` is run. Same with `double`.

We can check if this is true by adding some code in our method that tells us which "version" is called.

### ✍ Exercise: random or not random

Let's practice overloading methods! Write an overloaded method. It can either take an `int` or a `boolean`.

* If an `int` is passed in the method call, that number is doubled.
* If a `boolean` is passed, generate a random integer. Then,
    - Double the random number if the `boolean` is `true`.
    - Don't double it if the `boolean` is `false`.
* Return the result.

```java
public static int doMagic(int x) {
    return 2 * x;
}

public static int doMagic(boolean doDoubling) {
    int randomNum = (int) (Math.random() * 10) + 1;
    if (doDoubling) {
        return doMagic(randomNum);
    } else {
        return randomNum;
    }
}
```

```java
// Test code
System.out.println(doMagic(-4));
System.out.println(doMagic(true));
System.out.println(doMagic(false));
```

A method can have as many overloaded versions as needed.

## 📚 Overloading a method with different numbers of parameters

The examples above showed overloading a method with different parameter data types. Methods can also be overloaded with different numbers of parameters (1 `int` vs 3 `int`s).

```java
public static int f(int a, int b, int c) {
    return a + b + c;
}

public static int f(int a) {
    return f(a, 0, 0);
}
```

When we call `f` with 3 `int`s, the sum of them will be returned. When we call it with only 1 `int`, that number is returned (since we're just adding it by 0 + 0).

## 💻 Summary

Method overloading isn't used all the time, but it can really be very helpful when multiple **different** lists of parameters may be passed into the method's calls.
