# **Java Lesson 1.7**

## 📦 Variables

Variables are used to store data. In math, you may have already encountered variables, where a letter stores a certain value. In programming, variables serve the same purpose.

Examine the program below, and think about what needs to be changed if we want to change the name of the programming language from `C++` to `Python`.

```java
System.out.println("C++ is a programming language.");
System.out.println("C++ is cool.");
System.out.println("C++ is amazing.");
System.out.println("C++ is useful.");
```

Right now, we would need to modify all 4 lines of code to make the change. Variables allow us to do this with just one change.

### ☐ Declaring variables

Creating a variable in Java comes in 2 steps: **declaring** and **initializing** (optional). To declare a variable, we specify the variable's **type**, and its **name**. Below are some examples of **declaring** variables.

```java
String myString;
int x;
double someDoubleNumber;
boolean aBoolean;
```

Variable names can contain letters, number digits, and underscores. They start with a letter and cannot be a Java keyword.

Java is case-sensitive, so `java`, `JAVA`, and `jAvA` are different variables.

Good practice is to spell your identifiers' first word in lowercase and capitalize the first letter of subsequent words (examples: `helloWorld`, `variablesAreFun`).

### 🗹 Initializing variables

If a variable is a box, then declaring a variable is creating that box. But an empty box isn't useful, so let's put something inside it. This is called **initialization** (giving the variable an initial value).

We can initialize a variable after it's declared, or declare and initialize on the same line. The type of data stored in a variable needs to match the variable's declared type. Below are some examples:

```java
int anInt = 100;  // Declare + Initialize

boolean isHappy;  // Declare
isHappy = true;   // Initialize
```

Variables are useful because we can use the data they hold again and again. Let's try this out with our program from earlier.

```java
String language = "C++";
System.out.println(language + " is a programming language.");
System.out.println(language + " is cool.");
System.out.println(language + " is amazing.");
System.out.println(language + " is useful.");
```

We assign the value `"C++"` to the variable `language`, so Java is going to replace `language` with its value (`"C++"`) in our program after the variable initialization.

Now, if we want to change `language` from `C++` to `Python`, we only have to change one line:

```java
String language = "Python";
// The other lines
```

### 🔄 Reassigning values to variables

We can also assign new values to existing variables. Doing so will overwrite the old data with the new value.

```java
double y = 3.14159;
y = 2.71828;
// y is now 2.71828
```

### Δ Changing numerical variables

Something that is often done in programming is the modification of numerical variables. Let's say we have a variable `x`, and we want to **increment** `x` by `10`. We can do this:

```java
int x = 0;
x = x + 10;  // = is assigning, NOT equating
             // x + 10 is evaluated, and assigned to x
```

The code above is 100% valid, but you will see this way more often:

```java
int x = 0;
x += 10;
```

These 2 programs are equivalent, both increment `x` by `10`.

In addition to the `+=`, Java also has the `-=`, `*=`, `/=`, `%=` to modify a numerical variable.

### ✍ Exercise: variable-makers

Create a variable (declare and initialize in one line) that stores your age in years. Then, increment it by 20. Print out the variable's value each time it's changed.

```java
// Example solution
int age = 15;
System.out.println("My age right now is: " + age);
age += 20;
System.out.println("My age in 20 years is: " + age);
```

## 💻 Summary

Good job! You now know all about variables in Java programming, which is more important than you may realize right now. Just like data types, variables is used in almost 100% of computer programs.
