# **Java Lesson 2.1**

## ðŸ¤” Conditionals

As humans, we make decisions every day. With Java, we can program computers to do the same. Usually, we choose to do things because of conditions. In programming, this is done with conditional statements.

## â” `if`-`else if`-`else`

Our choices are often made based on conditions.
> **if** I'm free on Saturday, I'll hang out with my friends.

The **condition** here is *I'm free on Saturday*. If that condition is `true`, a certain action is performed.

In programming, conditionals behave the same way. We test a condition, and if that condition is...

* `true`, some code is run.
* `false`, that code is skipped.

### `if` statements

Below is the structure of an `if` statement in Java.

```java
if (condition) {
    someCode;
}
```

The condition in the parentheses evaluates to a `boolean` value. To review, `boolean`s are either `true` or `false`. If `condition` is `true`, `someCode` is run. Otherwise, it isn't. Below is an example.

```java
if (5 > 2) {
    System.out.println("5 > 2");
}
if (2 > 5) {
    System.out.println("2 > 5");
}
```

* `5 > 2` is printed, as the condition `5 > 2` evaluates to `true`.
* `2 > 5` is not printed, as the condition `2 > 5` evaluates to `false`.

### `if`-`else`

Oftentimes, we want to perform an alternative action when a condition is not `true`.

> **if** I'm free on Saturday, I'll hang out with my friends. **Otherwise**, I will do homework.

This can be modeled by `if`-`else`.

```java
if (condition) {
    someCode;
} else {
    someOtherCode;
}
```

* If condition is `true`, `someCode` is run and `someOtherCode` is not run.
* If condition is `false`, `someCode` is not run and `someOtherCode` is run;

### `if`-`else if`-`else`

`if`-`else` can perform the necessary logical testing behind many programs, but there are also cases where additional `else if`s are needed.

```java
int num = 0;
if (num < 0) {
    System.out.println("num is negative.");
} else if (num == 0) {
    System.out.println("num is 0.");
} else {
    System.out.println("num is positive.");
}
```

The difference between `if` and `else if` is that `if`s are **always** evaluated. `else if`s however, are only tested if the `if`s and `else if`s before it were `false`.

```java
if (true) {
    System.out.println("1");
} if (true) {  // Will be evaluated
    System.out.println("2");
}

if (true) {
    System.out.println("3");
} else if (true) {  // Won't be tested
    System.out.println("4");
}
```

Here is a summary of the `if`-`else if`-`else` structure in Java:

```java
if (a) {
    // Will run if a is true
} else if (b) {
    // Will run if a is false and b is true
} else {
    // Will run if a is false and b is false
}
```

### âœ Exercise: even or odd

Let's practice using conditionals by writing a short program that prints out whether a number is even or odd.

```java
// Example solution
int num = 0;
if (num % 2 == 0) {
    System.out.println(num + " is even.");
} else {
    System.out.println(num + " is odd.");
}
```

## ðŸ’» Summary

Conditionals are used everywhere, wherever a program needs to make a decision! Now with this tool in hand, you can make some pretty awesome projects!
