# **Java Lesson 2.2**

## 🔁 Loops

In life, we often do things repetitively.
> * **While** I have homework left, I'll do them.
> * I will continue programming **while** I have free time.

In programming, these scenarios can be modeled by **loops**, which allow us to run some code multiple times. Today, we will talk about `while` loops.

### 🔄 `while` loops

As the name suggests, `while` loops continue to run **while** a **condition** is `true`. What are some examples you can think of in your life that can be represented by a `while` loop? Even things as simple as counting 1-3 is a `while` loop in disguise (**while** I haven't reached 3, count upward from 1).

Below is the structure of a `while` loop in Java:

```java
while (condition) {
    someCode;
}
```

`while` `condition` is `true`, `someCode` will be run repetitively. Here's an example of that:

```java
int i = 1;
while (i <= 3) {
    System.out.println(i);
    i++;  // Equivalent to i += 1 (increment i by 1)
}
```

Above, we have a variable `i` with initial value 1. While `i` is less than or equal to 3, we will print `i` out, and increment it by 1.

What if the `i++;` is removed? That will result in an **infinite loop** that will never end! So always remember to put code to exit the loop by making the condition `false`!

### 🔂 `do`-`while` loops

The `do`-`while` loop is a variation of the standard `while` loop. Whereas `while` loops check the condition before entering loop, a `do`-`while` loop runs the code in the loop once before checking the condition and continuing when it's `true`. So `do`-`while` loops run at least once.

```java
do {
    // Some code
} while (condition);
```

```java
int i = 10;
do {
    System.out.println(i);
    i--;
} while (i > 10);
```

### ✍ Exercise: even or odd - version 2.0

Loops and conditional statements can be combined! Last lesson, you wrote a program to determine whether a number is even or odd. But that only runs once. Now that you know `while` loops, improve that program by allowing user inputs, and putting the code in a loop that runs multiple times.

```java
// Possible answer
import java.util.Scanner;

Scanner sc = new Scanner(System.in);
int i = 0, num;
while (i < 3) {
    System.out.print("Enter a number: ");
    num = sc.nextInt();
    if (num % 2 == 0) {
        System.out.println(num + " is even.");
    } else {
        System.out.println(num + " is odd.");
    }
    i++;
}
```

## 💻 Summary

Loops are an essential part of programming, and now you have learned the `while` loop as well as its variation, the `do`-`while` loop.

In the next lesson of this chapter, we will talk about another important type of loops, `for` loops. These will be very helpful to you as you write more complex programs.
