# **Java Lesson 2.3**

## ðŸ”¢ `for` loops

Last lesson, you learned about `while` loops in Java programming. Today, we will be talking about another type of loops, `for` loops.

`while` loops are **repetitive**, and repeat **while** a condition is `true`. A common task for using loops is doing something a certain number of times. If we know the exact number of times we want to run some code, we can write something like this:

```java
int i = 1;
while (i < 4) {
    System.out.println("Loop running: " + i);
    i++;
}
```

The 3 most important parts of this `while` loop we need to pay extra attention to are:

1. `int i = 1;`
2. `i < 4`
3. `i++;`

This use of loops is so frequently seen that we have a type of loop dedicated just to this task. `for` loops can be used when **exactly how many times a loop should run** is known. Sometimes the programmer doesn't know this, but the computer knows this value.

The `while` loop above can be written in a more compact `for` loop form.

```java
for (int i = 1; i < 4; i++) {
    System.out.println("Loop running: " + i);
}
```

The important part of a `for` loop is the expressions in the parentheses. Below is the typical syntax of a `for` loop.

```java
for (initialization; termination; change) {
    someCode;
}
```

* `initialization`: initializes the **loop control variable**; done ONCE before entering loop.
* `termination`: termination condition for the loop; evaluated after each time the loop runs.
* `change`: modifies loop control variable; done after each time the loop runs.
* `someCode`: the code that is run each time the loop is executed.

A semicolon (`;`) is required after the `initialization` and `termination` statements.

Some more examples of `for` loops are below:

The loop control variable can be declared out of loop.

```java
int num;
for (num = 5; num > 2; num--) {
    System.out.println(num);
}
```

`termination` and `change` expressions can be more interesting.

```java
for (int j = -3; j < j * j - 1; j++) {
    System.out.println(j);
}
```

```java
for (int k = 0; k < 11; k += 3) {
    System.out.println(k);
}
```

### âœ Exercise: sum it all

Using a `for` loop, calculate the sum of the whole numbers between 1 and 10 (including 1 and 10).

```java
// Possible program
int sum = 0;
for (int i = 1; i < 11; i++) {
    sum += i;
}
System.out.println(sum);
```

```java
// Another possible program with different termination condition
int sum = 0;
for (int i = 1; i <= 10; i++) {
    sum += i;
}
System.out.println(sum);
```

## ðŸ’» Summary

Loops (`while`, `do`-`while`, `for`) are incredibly important parts of programming, and are very useful in writing programs. The concepts you learned about regarding loops in this chapter will definitely be helpful in writing better Java programs.
