# **Java Lesson 4.1**

## 🧮 What are arrays?

Before we start talking about arrays, let's first take a moment to think about **data**. So far, the data types we have been dealing with in this course have all been able to store only **one** value. An `int` can store **one** integer, a `boolean` can store **one** true/false value. The one data type that is a slight exception is the `String` data type, since a `String` does not have a defined length and can be as long or as short as we want.

You can also think about a `String` as a collection of characters. Another data type that stores a collection of data in Java is the **array** data type. An array is essentially a **list of values**. For instance, we can store a list of tasks, a list of prices, or a list of `boolean`s in **one** Java array.

## 🔗 Making arrays in Java

Now that you know what arrays are conceptually, let's talk about declaring and initializing arrays in Java.

Declaring arrays is different from declaring the primitive data types we learned before. There isn't one data type keyword we use. Instead, the declared type differs based on the type of data that will be placed in the array. Following that data type, we write a pair of square brackets.

So if we want to declare an array of `String`s called `myArray`, we can write:

```java
String[] myArray;
```

An array of `boolean`s can be declared like this:

```java
boolean[] arrayOfBooleans;
```

And the same idea with other data types.

Now on to initialization. An array is written as a comma-separated list of values inside curly brackets. Here are some examples:

```java
String[] tasks = {"Learn programming", "Read", "Do chores", "Stay alive"};
int[] prices = {1, 2, 3, 4, 5};
boolean[] randomArray = {true, false, false, true};
```

Here's another way of declaring arrays if you don't know what values the array will take.

```java
int[] arr = new int[2];
```

This is allocating memory for 2 `int`s in our array called `arr`. Below are some more example of this syntax of array-making.

```java
double[] dArr = new double[5];
String[] sArr = new String[3];
boolean[] bArr = new boolean[3];
```

After we initialize an array with default values, we can modify the values using indexing.

## ⛏ Indexing arrays

To access a specific element in an array is called **indexing**. We access elements stored in arrays using their **indices**. Indexing in programming is different than how we usually count in life. In arrays of many programming languages like Java, the index of the first element is **0**, second element is **1**, etc.

Take the following array as example: `{"Java", "Ruby", "Dart", "Go"}`

* Index 0: Java
* Index 1: Ruby
* Index 2: Dart
* Index 3: Go

Let's take a look at this in Java code.

```java
String[] programmingLanguages = {"Java", "Ruby", "Dart", "Go"};
System.out.println(programmingLanguages[0]);
System.out.println(programmingLanguages[1]);
System.out.println(programmingLanguages[2]);
System.out.println(programmingLanguages[3]);
```

In addition to accessing the elements of an array, indexing also allows us to modify elements of an array.

```java
String[] programmingLanguages = {"Java", "Ruby", "Dart", "Go"};
System.out.println(programmingLanguages[0]);

programmingLanguages[0] = "JavaScript";

System.out.println(programmingLanguages[0]);
```

## 📏 Length of arrays

Arrays in Java have a property called `length`, which stores the length of an array (the number of elements it has). We can access that value using `array.length`.

```java
int[] array = {1, 2, 3, 4};
System.out.println(array.length);
```

## 🔄 Looping over arrays

We can use loops to iterate over arrays. The code below prints out the elements of an array.

```java
String[] devices = {"Computer", "Phone", "Printer", "Speaker", "Monitor"};
for (int i = 0; i < devices.length; i++) {
    System.out.println(devices[i]);
}
```

### ✍ Exercise: array maker

Make an array that stores more than 5 values. Use indexing to grab the second value from the array, and print it out. Use indexing to change the 4th value of the array. Use a `for`-loop to print out the values of the array.

There are so many ways of how you can do this exercise problem. Below is just one example.

```java
int[] ints = {3, 1, 4, 1, 5, 9};
System.out.println(ints[1]);
ints[3] = 7;
for (int i = 0; i < ints.length; i++) {
    System.out.print(ints[i]);
}
```

## 💻 Summary

Arrays is a very useful component of Java programming. Arrays can be used to store a variety of different list-like data.
