# **Java Lesson 4.2**

## 💹 `ArrayList`s

In the last lesson of this course, we learned about arrays in Java, and how to use arrays to store lists of values as collections. Today, we're going to learn about the `ArrayList` class, which is another way of storing array-like data in Java.

## 🆚 Arrays vs `ArrayList`s

So what's the difference between arrays and `ArrayLists`s? The main difference between these two data types is that arrays have fixed sizes (in other words, you cannot modify the length of an array after you set it in the array declaration). On the other hand, the size of an `ArrayList` is **dynamic**, which means that it can be changed whenever that's needed.

## 🏭 Making `ArrayList`s

Before we can use `ArrayList`s, we have to import the `ArrayList` class at the top of our Java program.

```java
import java.util.ArrayList;
```

Now we can create `ArrayList`s in our program.

The syntax for the declaration of `ArrayList`s is different from that of arrays. Here's the general syntax:

```java
ArrayList<DATA_TYPE> VARIABLE_NAME = new ArrayList<DATA_TYPE>();
```

To make an `ArrayList` storing `String`s, we can just write:

```java
ArrayList<String> names = new ArrayList<String>();
```

Something to note is that `ArrayList`s can only store **objects** and not **primitive data types**. A general rule of thumb to tell the difference between the two is that objects are capitalized while primitive data types are entirely lowercase. So `String` is an object in Java while `int`, `double`, and `boolean` are all primitive data types.

To store primitive data in an `ArrayList`, we can use the data type's **wrapper class** when declaring the `ArrayList`. The wrapper class of `int` is `Integer`, `Double` for `double`, and `Boolean` for `boolean`.

Below are examples of `ArrayList`s storing primitive data types.

```java
ArrayList<Integer> ints = new ArrayList<Integer>();
ArrayList<Double> doubles = new ArrayList<Double>();
ArrayList<Boolean> booleans = new ArrayList<Boolean>();
```

## 🛠 `ArrayList` operations

After declaring an `ArrayList`, we can perform operations on it using methods of the `ArrayList` class. Below are some of the most important.

### Adding items

To add an element to an `ArrayList`, the `add()` method is used. Let's use our `ints` `ArrayList` as example.

```java
ints.add(1);
ints.add(2);
ints.add(3);
ints.add(4);
```

### Accessing items

`ArrayList` items are accessed through indexing. The difference from arrays is that instead of putting index in square brackets, we pass them into the `get()` method.

```java
System.out.println(ints.get(0));
System.out.println(ints.get(3));
```

### Modifying items

To change the value of an `ArrayList` at a certain index, the `set()` method is used. We pass two values into it, the first one being the index where the new value is being set, and the second being the value we're setting at the index.

```java
ints.set(0, -9);
ints.set(3, -5);
```

### Length of arrays

To see the length of an `ArrayList`, we can use the `size()` method.

```java
System.out.println(ints.size());
```

### Removing items

To remove one item from an `ArrayList`, we can call the `remove()` method passing in the index where we want to remove the value. Or, we can call the `clear()` method to remove all values from an `ArrayList`.

```java
ints.remove(2);
ints.clear();
```

### ✍ Exercise: using `ArrayList`

In this exercise, make an `ArrayList` storing true/false values. Add some values, change some values, remove some values, print some values, and loop through some values.

Here's one example:

```java
ArrayList<Boolean> yesOrNo = new ArrayList<Boolean>();

yesOrNo.add(true);
yesOrNo.add(false);
yesOrNo.add(true);

yesOrNo.set(0, false);

yesOrNo.remove(1);

for (int i = yesOrNo.size() - 1; i >= 0; i--) {
    System.out.println(yesOrNo.get(i));
}
```

## 💻 Summary

That's it for this lesson about `ArrayList`s. Sometimes, this data type is more convenient than arrays due to its more dynamic nature.
