# **Java Lesson 4.4**

## 🍰 Multidimensional arrays

So far, all our arrays have stored simple values: `String`s, `int`s, `double`s, etc. What if we want to store arrays inside of arrays? That's where **multidimensional arrays** come into play.

Multidimensional arrays are **arrays of arrays**, and can be useful when we want to store data in table-like formats, which is common in things like data science and machine learning.

### Making multidimensional arrays in Java

To make a multidimensional array in Java, the biggest difference is in the declaration. Specifically, we put more than one pair of square brackets `[]` after the data type of the array. Here's an example of a 2-dimensional array declaration.

```java
int[][] nums;
```

To initialize such an array, we simply put inner arrays inside of the outer array.

```java
int[][] nums = {
    {1, 2},
    {3, 4},
    {5, 6}
};
```

Right now, `nums` store 3 arrays inside of it, each storing 2 numbers. You can also think of this array as a table with 3 rows and 2 columns.

| <span style="font-weight: normal">1</span> | <span style="font-weight: normal">2</span> |
|--------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------|
| 3                                          | 4                                          |
| 5                                          | 6                                          |

### Indexing multidimensional arrays

Working with multidimensional arrays may initially appear to be more complicated than 1D arrays, but everything you've learned so far about 1-dimensional arrays still hold true when dealing with arrays of arrays.

When selecting one value from a 2D array, we first specify the inner array (row), then the index of the value in that array.

So if we want to access the `3` from `nums`, we first look for its row index. It's in row 2, so index of 1. In that inner array, `3` is index `0`. So to print out 3, we can just write...

```java
System.out.println(nums[1][0]);
```

Modifying elements is the same idea.

### Looping through multidimensional arrays

To loop through a multidimensional array in Java, we have to use nested loops, which are loops nested in another.

With a `for` loop...

```java
for (int row = 0; row < nums.length; row++) {
    for (int col = 0; col < nums[row].length; col++) {
        System.out.print(nums[row][col]);
    }
}
```

With a for-each loop...

```java
for (int[] row : nums) {
    for (int num : row) {
        System.out.print(num);
    }
}
```

### ✍ Exercise: rows and columns

Let's just practice the basics of using 2D arrays. Make one, put in some data, change some of its values, and loop through the array to print out what's inside.

```java
String[][] words = {
    {"Java", "Basics"},
    {"Programming", "Programmer"}
};

words[0][1] = "Great";

for (String[] row : words) {
    for (String word : row) {
        System.out.println(word);
    }
}
```

## 💻 Summary

Although the examples shown above were all of 2-dimensional arrays, arrays can store as many layers of nested arrays as is necessary. This allows programmers to do many powerful and useful data storage/manipulation.
