# **Java Lesson 4.5**

## 🔗 `HashMap`s

Today we're going to learn about a collection data structure that is somewhat different from what we have learned about in previous lessons (arrays and `ArrayList`s).

The `HashMap` data structure is similar to arrays and `ArrayList`s in that they all store collections of data. The difference is *how* `HashMap`s store data. Whereas arrays and `ArrayList`s store values in lists, `HashMap`s store **key-value pairs**.

You can think about this data structure like a dictionary. We look up a word using the **key** (the word itself). The definition of the word is the **value**. The word and its definition form a **key-value pair**, which can be easily represented by a `HashMap` in Java.

| Key (word)  | Value (definition)           |
|-------------|------------------------------|
| Programmer  | Someone who does programming |
| Programming | Something programmers do     |

## `HashMap`s in Java

Like `ArrayList`, `HashMap` has to be imported before we can use the class.

```java
import java.util.HashMap;
```

### Creating `HashMap`s

The declaration and initialization of `HashMap`s is also somewhat similar to those of `ArrayList`s. Below is the syntax:

```java
HashMap<K_TYPE, V_TYPE> VARIABLE = new HashMap<K_TYPE, V_TYPE>();
```

* `K_TYPE`: Data type of the keys
* `V_TYPE`: Data type of the values

So if we want to create a `HashMap` with `String` keys and `String` values, we can write:

```java
HashMap<String, String> dictionary = new HashMap<String, String>();
```

Similar to `ArrayList`s (there are quite a few similarities between `ArrayList`s and `HashMap`s as you will soon see), only objects can be put into a `HashMap`, so we have to use wrapper classes when declaring `HashMap`s that store primitive data types as keys or values.

```java
HashMap<String, Integer> ages = new HashMap<String, Integer>();
```

### Adding data

To add key-value pairs into a `HashMap`, we can use the `put()` method.

```java
dictionary.put("Programmer", "Someone who does programming");
dictionary.put("Programming", "Something programmers do");
```

### Accessing values through keys

We can use the `get()` method to access values in a `HashMap`.

```java
System.out.println(dictionary.get("Programmer"));
System.out.println(dictionary.get("Programming"));
```

### Size of `HashMap`s

The `size()` method returns the number of key-value pairs in a `HashMap`.

```java
System.out.println(dictionary.size());
```

### Removing items

To remove a key-value pair from a `HashMap`, we can call the `remove()` method with the key as the argument. Or, we can call the `clear()` method to clear the entire `HashMap`.

```java
dictionary.remove("Programming");
dictionary.clear();
```

### Looping through a `HashMap`

* The `keySet()` method returns the keys of a `HashMap`.
* The `values()` method returns the values.

```java
// Keys
for (String key : dictionary.keySet()) {
    System.out.println(key);
}

// Values
for (String value : dictionary.values()) {
    System.out.println(value);
}
```

### ✍ Exercise: your personal dictionary

Using a `HashMap`, make your personal dictionary with words as keys and definitions as values.

Then, using *one* loop, print out the keys and values of your dictionary.

```java
HashMap<String, String> dictionary = new HashMap<String, String>();

dictionary.put("Java", "a high-level, class-based, object-oriented programming language that is designed to have as few implementation dependencies as possible");
dictionary.put("Python", "an interpreted high-level general-purpose programming language that emphasizes code readability");

for (String key : dictionary.keySet()) {
    System.out.println(key + ": " + dictionary.get(key));
}
```

## 💻 Summary

Congratulations on learning about `HashMap`s! Now you know how to conveniently store key-value pairs in a data structure.
